chore: wip (#640)
ipvm-wg/homestar: example-llm-workflows/README.md

# Running and Replaying AI Chains in Wasm On a Private, Locally Hosted LLM

_Author_: [Zeeshan Lakhani][zeeshan-lakhani]

## Outline

- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
- [Expanded Tutorial and Background](#expanded-tutorial-and-background)
- [Outputs and Discussion](#outputs-and-discussion)
- [Foundations for privacy](#foundations-for-privacy)
- [What is Homestar in a Nutshell?](#what-is-homestar-in-a-nutshell)

## Quickstart

> You can run this project completely in your console (shell). It consists of running a forked [Homestar][homestar] node (read more about Homestar in [What is Homestar in a Nutshell?](#what-is-homestar-in-a-nutshell)) and a local version of the [EveryCLI][every-cli] utility, a tool for working with the [Everywhere Computer][everywhere-computer], which is an interface for running workflows composed of [Wasm][wasm] / [Wasi][wasi] functions on Homestar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run this project completely in your console (shell). It consists of running a forked [Homestar][homestar] node (read more about Homestar in [What is Homestar in a Nutshell?](#what-is-homestar-in-a-nutshell)) and a local version of the [EveryCLI][every-cli] utility, a tool for working with the [Everywhere Computer][everywhere-computer], which is an interface for running workflows composed of [Wasm][wasm] / [WASI][wasi] functions on Homestar.
```

WASI is uppercase in the linked resource.

> Let's first unzip [our tar file][tar-link] containing binaries and what's needed to run our demos, including workflow JSON files and [LLaMA 3][llama-3] models (created from [llama.cpp][llama.cpp]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's first unzip [our tar file][tar-link] containing binaries and what we will need to run our demos, including workflow JSON files and [LLaMA 3][llama-3] models (created from [llama.cpp][llama.cpp]).
```

```console
tar -xf haii.tar.gz -C <target/directory>
cd <target/directory>/example-llm-workflows
```

Everything going forward should take place within the `example-llm-workflows` folder.

> In one window, let's run the forked Homestar node (built with LLaMA 3 bindings) while also setting some environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In one console window, run the forked Homestar node (built with LLaMA 3 bindings) while also setting some environment variables:
```
Keeping it consistent with the next "window" mention. Also, the "let's" isn't needed as you are directly giving instructions.

```console
EVERY_CLI=true LLAMA_METAL=1 ./homestar start -c homestar_config.toml
```

> In another console window, let's run the local version of EVERY-CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In another console window, run the local version of EVERY-CLI:
```

✔ Control Panel is running at https://control.everywhere.computer

[9:40:54 AM]  WARN  [listhen] Trying to listhen on private host "127.0.0.1" with public option enabled.

[9:40:54 AM] ◐ Starting cloudflared tunnel to http://127.0.0.1:3000/

              █▀▀▀▀▀▀▀██▀██████▀██▀▀▀▀▀██▀▀▀▀▀▀▀█
              █ █▀▀▀█ █▄ ▀ ▄▄▀▄▀▄ █  ████ █▀▀▀█ █
              █ █   █ █▄▄▀▄▀ ▄██  ▀▀▀   █ █   █ █
              █ ▀▀▀▀▀ █ █ █▀▄ ▄ ▄▀█▀█▀█ █ ▀▀▀▀▀ █
              █▀▀▀▀▀█▀▀▀▀▀█ ▀  ▄▀▄█ ▄▀▀▀▀█▀█▀█▀██
              █▄█ ▀▀ ▀▄▄ █▀▀▄▀▀▄██▄▄▀█▄██▄██▀▄ ▄█
              █▄ ██▀▀▀▀█ ▄ ██▄▀▀▀▄▄▀▄ █  ▄▀▀▀▄███
              █▀▀▄ █▀▀▀▀▄ █▄ ▀▀ ▀▀▄ ▄█▄█ ▄▀▀██ ▄█
              █ ▀▀▀▀▄▀█▀█▀█ ▄▀ █▀▄█▄▄ ▄ ██▄▀█▄▀██
              █▀█▀ ▀█▀▀▀▀▄▀▀██▀▄▄▀▄▄▀█▄█▀ ▀▀ █ ▄█
              █  ▄██▀▀██▄▀ ██▄▄▄▀█▄ ▄ ▀  █▄▀█▄▀██
              █ █ ██▀▀███▀█▄  ▀▄▀ ▄▄█▀▄▀ ▄█▀ █ ▄█
              █ ██ ▀█▀ █  █ ▄▀▀▄▀█ ▄▄▀█ ▀▀▀ ▄▄█▀█
              █▀▀▀▀▀▀▀█  █▀▀██▀▄▄▄▄ ▄▀  █▀█ ▀▀▀▄█
              █ █▀▀▀█ █▀▀█ ██▄ ▄▀▄ ▄▄▄▄ ▀▀▀ ▄▄▀ █
              █ █   █ █  ▀█▄  ▀  ▄▄ ▀▀ █ ▀▄▄▄█▄▄█
              █ ▀▀▀▀▀ █ █ █ ▄▀  ▀█▄█▄ ▀▀█▀▀▄▄▄▀██
              ▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀▀

  ➜ Local:    http://127.0.0.1:3000/
```

> EveryCLI has started a gateway that loads Wasm components onto [IPFS][ipfs] for persistent storage, prepares workflows, and integrates with the Homestar runtime to schedule and execute these workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EveryCLI has started a gateway that loads Wasm components onto [IPFS][ipfs] for persistent storage. It also prepares workflows and integrates with the Homestar runtime to schedule and execute workflows.
```

> With EveryCLI up, in another window, let's POST a job/workflow to the local EveryCLI `localhost` endpoint, which will execute the [`simple.json`](./simple.json2) workflow on [Homestar][homestar]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With EveryCLI up, in another window, POST a job/workflow to the local EveryCLI `localhost` endpoint, which will execute the [`simple.json`](./simple.json2) workflow on [Homestar][homestar]:
```

```console
curl localhost:3000/run --json @simple.json
```

> Once this completes (which can take some time mind you), we'll get back a response like this from the execution, which is returning text from a [LLaMA 3 instruction tuned model][instruction-llama]:

Reviewer: Might be good to show the prompt here to contextualize the returned text.

--- 
I see you have the prompt below, but mentioning "Attractions in Pittsburgh" here would still be good.

```

This [`simple.json`](./simple.json) workflow runs one task that executes a [Guest][guest] Wasm module's `gen` function on the [Host][host], where `gen` takes in one argument (`"Attractions in Pittsburgh"`) and itself calls a Host-only `prompt_with` function, which is integrated with LLaMA's model's bindings and tuned parameters.

**simple.json**

``` json
{
  "tasks": [
    {
      "run": {
        "name": "genParagraph",
        "input": {
          "args": ["Attractions in Pittsburgh"],
          "func": "gen"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}

```

**gen("Attractions in Pittsburgh")**

``` rust
fn gen(topic: String) -> String {
    log(Level::Info, "topic", &topic);
    let input = format!(
        "{} is an awesome topic. Let's write about it in a few sentences.",
        topic
    );
    prompt_with(
        &input,
        Some(
            PathBuf::from(env!("CARGO_WORKSPACE_DIR"))
                .join("example-llm-workflows/models/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct.Q4_0.gguf")
                .display()
                .to_string()
                .as_str(),
        ),
    )
}
```

## Expanded Tutorial and Background

> Next, we're going to dive deeper into working with workflows and defining [AI Chains][ai-chains], which chain LLM steps together. All of these example workflows are somewhat paired down, but they were inspired by the paragraph/article map-reduce collaborative writing task discussed in the [CrowdForge: Crowdsourcing Complex Work][crowdforge] paper, one in which we reproduced for homework with Google's API-based [Gemini language model][gemini].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we're going to dive deeper into working with workflows and defining [AI Chains][ai-chains], which chain LLM steps together. All of these example workflows are somewhat pared down, but they were inspired by the paragraph/article map-reduce collaborative writing task discussed in the [CrowdForge: Crowdsourcing Complex Work][crowdforge] paper, the one in which we reproduced for homework with Google's API-based [Gemini language model][gemini].
```

### The Basics

```console
curl localhost:3000/run --json @simple.json
```

We've already covered this simplistic LLM prompt workflow centered on providing a topic in the [Quickstart](#quickstart) section. Let's move on to the more fun stuff.

### A Sequential Chain

```console
curl localhost:3000/run --json @chain1.json
```

> Chaining multiple prompts together can address a much wider range of human tasks and allow for the exploration of different prompting techniques, like few-shot and [chain-of-thought][chain-of-thought-paper] variations, which can help guide LLMs to better empirical results. Given that our compute engine is designed around the framework of an ordered workflow or pipeline, where the output of one task feeds into the input of another, we can easily generate AI chains by way of pipelines where tasks build off each previous task's output:

Reviewer: Have a link for `few-shot`?

> During the 19th century, Pittsburgh underwent rapid industrialization and growth. The city's proximity to the Allegheny River and Lake Erie made it a key location for the Pennsylvania Railroad and other transportation lines, further boosting its economy. Steel production became a major industry in the late 1800s, with companies like Carnegie Steel and Jones & Laughlin Steel dominating the market. This period of growth led to the development of many iconic Pittsburgh landmarks, including the Smithfield United Presbyterian Church and the Cathedral of Learning at the University of Pittsburgh.

> In the mid-20th century, Pittsburgh's steel industry began to decline due to increased competition from other countries and economic shifts. However, the city has adapted and diversified its economy over the years, with a focus on healthcare, education, technology, and the arts. Today, Pittsburgh is known for its vibrant cultural scene, world-class universities, and stunning natural beauty, making it a great place to live, work, and visit.

### MapReduce

```console
curl localhost:3000/run --json @map_reduce.json
```

> To more applicability encode the [MapReduce][map-reduce] example from the [Crowdforge][crowdforge] paper, I implemented a `prompt_chain` Wasm/Wasi function registered on the Host that takes in a system prompt (e.g. "You are journalist writing about cities."), an input (e.g. an ongoing article), a map step prompt with a `{{text}}` placeholder that is filled in, a reduce step, which folds over (combines) the generated text(s) from the map step, and then the optional LLaMA model stored as a [`gguf`][gguf]. If the optional model path is not provided, the Host will fall back to the default `Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct.Q4_0.gguf` model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To more applicability encode the [MapReduce][map-reduce] example from the [Crowdforge][crowdforge] paper, I implemented a `prompt_chain` Wasm/WASI function registered on the Host that takes in a system prompt (e.g. "You are journalist writing about cities."), an input (e.g. an ongoing article), a map step prompt with a `{{text}}` placeholder that is filled in, a reduce step, which folds over (combines) the generated text(s) from the map step, and then the optional LLaMA model stored as a [`gguf`][gguf]. If the optional model path is not provided, the Host will fall back to the default `Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct.Q4_0.gguf` model.
```

### Idempotent Replay

Typically when relaying questions and prompts to LLM applications, you'll get varied responses and answers even when you don't change the input text.

When a Homestar node receives a workflow containing a task that has already been executed, either with its index (key) and output (value) stored locally (most optimal) or retrieved from a shared DHT (Distributed Hash Table) over the network. In that case, it can replay that task without re-execution or having to fetch the Wasm module from its source. This replayability is akin to [durable function/execution][durable-fn] frameworks like [Cadence][cadence] and [Temporal][temporal] but happens over a decentralized mesh instead of a centralized infrastructure.

So, what does that mean for us? If we provide the same arguments to our Guest Wasm functions, Homestar will return cached responses instantly, which saves us both time and resources, as waiting for large prompt responses when using models, even *smaller* ones like LLaMA 3 trained with 8 billion parameters, can be somewhat latent on devices with limited GPU and memory (like my personal computer).

> Is there a way to always provide *new* hallucinations from the Host model? Yes, there is! We can use the `--debug` flag when we start EveryCli to force re-execution of the tasks in our workflow.

Reviewer: Nice! This is a great lever maintaining consistency or just exploring responses.

```console
./every-cli/cli.js dev ../example-llm-workflows/llm.wasm --debug
```

## Foundations for Privacy

> The learning goals of this project were to experiment with working with LLMs locally on hosts where the training data and tuning of a model remains private and only derived information from prompt-based AI chains can be shared with other users/peers for consumption, allowing for working with AI computation in ways not tied to any specific vendor or large cloud provider. Essentially, this showcases a positive avenue for decentralized, user-controlled AI-oriented computation that's everything that [IEEE Spectrum's Open-Source AI Is Uniquely Dangerous][ieee] isn't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The learning goals of this project were to experiment with working with LLMs locally on hosts where the training data and tuning of a model remains private and only derived information from prompt-based AI chains can be shared with other users/peers for consumption. AI computation is possible without being tied to a specific vendor or large cloud provider. Essentially, this showcases a positive avenue for decentralized, user-controlled AI-oriented computation that's everything that [IEEE Spectrum's Open-Source AI Is Uniquely Dangerous][ieee] isn't.
```
Possible rewrite. Sentence was a bit long.

Also, good call out about that IEEE article. 💯

> Localized, open-source LLM models for home and on-prem use cases are growing in popularity, even leading to the creation of a [LocalLLaMA reddit][reddit-post] community! We've seen how [GDPR][gdpr] has increased the need for companies to be more careful around [PII management and data privacy isolation across regions and region-compliance laws][so-privacy].

Reviewer: Might also mention companies that wish to protect proprietary data. With the wholesale slurping of data by AI companies, some companies are nervous about how their data might be used.

> Self-hosted, privately managed model deployments hit on many of the privacy and security modules taught in our course. Incorporating ways for users to chain LLM steps together while controlling what inference gets exhibited without the infrastructure concerns or data risks typically associated with external cloud services, presents a unique opportunity to democratize AI capabilities. By ensuring that users can interact with and execute complex AI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Self-hosted, privately managed model deployments hit on many of the privacy and security modules taught in our course. Incorporating ways for users to chain LLM steps together while controlling what inference gets exhibited without the infrastructure concerns or data risks typically associated with external cloud services, presents a unique opportunity to make AI capabilities broadly available. By ensuring that users can interact with and execute complex AI
```

Totally optional edit! IMO "democratize" is an abused term when what we really mean is making something more available.

> workflows with ease, the project aims to bridge the gap between advanced AI technologies and those with some software development background. This approach not only aligns with the course's focus on privacy and security, but also empowers users by providing them with tools to leverage AI in a secure, private, and user-friendly manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
workflows with ease, this project aims to bridge the gap between advanced AI technologies and those with some software development background. This approach not only aligns with the course's focus on privacy and security, but also empowers users by providing them with tools to leverage AI in a secure, private, and user-friendly manner.
```
Also, there may be an unneeded line break right before this one.

> Regarding further alignment with our class, the rise of LLMs has made the transparency of existence, operation, and first-class design for transparency urgent ethical matters as more and more companies move to gather data and push AI agents into our everyday lives. OpenAI's chat interface (to GPT) spawned much of the burgeoning popularity of LLMs, but with OpenAI, we know the CEO of the company is linked to another company (Worldcoin) that has [shady digital-identity practices][iris-scanning].

Reviewer: "transparency" twice here is confusing.

Author: @bgins this actually hits on bullets in a lecture :).

> **Trust** has come up a lot in our course. The future of HCI/AI is deeply entangled in what of our data is private and how we can control what becomes public. This project demonstrates tooling that makes this line distinct and controllable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Trust** has come up a lot in our course. The future of HCI/AI is deeply entangled in what parts of our data are private and how we can control what becomes public. This project demonstrates tooling that makes this line distinct and controllable.
```

### Peer Sharing with Only 1 LLM

![3 connected notes, but only 1 host with bindings for LLaMA 3](./llama_host.png)

> In the [video walkthrough][video] we showcase how one node built without LLM features and LLaMA bindings can receive receipts for a workflow run on a node it's connected with over the LAN (local-area network) that was compiled with the features and bindings. Imagine finely tuning a LLaMA model on custom healthcare data (which is doable) and wanting certain users to run prompt chains against it. You wouldn't want the users of the platform to access the model itself, but you'd like for them to interact with it with clear separation. These on-prem models are becoming more and more important for companies, countries, and the people in between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [video walkthrough][video] we showcase how one node built without LLM features and LLaMA bindings can receive receipts for a workflow run on a node it's connected to over the LAN (local-area network) that was compiled with the features and bindings. Imagine finely tuning a LLaMA model on custom healthcare data (which is doable) and wanting certain users to run prompt chains against it. You wouldn't want the users of the platform to access the model itself, but you'd like for them to interact with it with clear separation. These on-prem models are becoming more and more important for companies, countries, and the people in between them.
```

### Running LLM Tasks Offline

> The [video walkthrough][video] illustrates the power of executing AI-focused computational workflows on local devices, particularly in offline scenarios. This can also be extended to scenarios where one wants to intentionally restrict online connectivity. All of this not only underscores the versatility and robustness of decentralized AI frameworks but also highlights the broader implications of embracing [local-first software][wired] principles within the realm of HCI/AI. By prioritizing local execution and data processing, users gain greater control over their computing environments, ensuring privacy, and security, and reducing reliance on external infrastructures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [video walkthrough][video] illustrates the power of executing AI-focused computational workflows on local devices, particularly in offline scenarios. This can also be extended to scenarios where one wants to intentionally restrict online connectivity. All of this not only underscores the versatility and robustness of decentralized AI frameworks but also highlights the broader implications of embracing [local-first software][wired] principles within the realm of HCI/AI. By prioritizing local execution and data processing, users gain greater control over their computing environments, ensuring privacy and security, and reducing reliance on external infrastructures.
```

The outputs of these functions are indexed by their instruction, composed of the Wasm module’s content identifier (CID), function name, and function arguments (and with an optional nonce if you want to guarantee uniqueness), and stored and tracked as compute receipts. After execution, these receipts are pushed to the shared network’s distributed hash table (DHT) and gossiped to connected peers, whether they're connected directly or discovered through mDNS or a rendezvous protocol for peer discovery.

### Homestar + LLaMA + AI chains

For this project, I forked and extended the Homestar codebase (of which I'm a lead developer) to

* Provide feature-flagged (for cross-platform compilation) local-only LLaMA model bindings with tuned parameters.

> * Integrate general-usage Wasm/Wasi Host LLM-chain prompt functions (with typed interfaces) for execution by Guest code written in any language that can be compiled to Wasm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Integrate general-usage Wasm/WASI Host LLM-chain prompt functions (with typed interfaces) for execution by Guest code written in any language that can be compiled to Wasm.
```

# Running and Replaying AI Chains in Wasm On a Private, Locally Hosted LLM

_Author_: [Zeeshan Lakhani][zeeshan-lakhani]

## Outline

- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
- [Expanded Tutorial and Background](#expanded-tutorial-and-background)
- [Outputs and Discussion](#outputs-and-discussion)

> - [Foundations for privacy](#foundations-for-privacy)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Foundations for Privacy](#foundations-for-privacy)
```

> During the 19th century, Pittsburgh underwent rapid industrialization and growth. The city's proximity to the Allegheny River and Lake Erie made it a key location for the Pennsylvania Railroad and other transportation lines, further boosting its economy. Steel production became a major industry in the late 1800s, with companies like Carnegie Steel and Jones & Laughlin Steel dominating the market. This period of growth led to the development of many iconic Pittsburgh landmarks, including the Smithfield United Presbyterian Church and the Cathedral of Learning at the University of Pittsburgh.

> In the mid-20th century, Pittsburgh's steel industry began to decline due to increased competition from other countries and economic shifts. However, the city has adapted and diversified its economy over the years, with a focus on healthcare, education, technology, and the arts. Today, Pittsburgh is known for its vibrant cultural scene, world-class universities, and stunning natural beauty, making it a great place to live, work, and visit.

### MapReduce

```console
curl localhost:3000/run --json @map_reduce.json
```

> To more applicability encode the [MapReduce][map-reduce] example from the [Crowdforge][crowdforge] paper, I implemented a `prompt_chain` Wasm/WASI function registered on the Host that takes in a system prompt (e.g. "You are journalist writing about cities."), an input (e.g. an ongoing article), a map step prompt with a `{{text}}` placeholder that is filled in, a reduce step, which folds over (combines) the generated text(s) from the map step, and then the optional LLaMA model stored as a [`gguf`][gguf]. If the optional model path is not provided, the Host will fall back to the default `Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct.Q4_0.gguf` model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To more applicably encode the [MapReduce][map-reduce] example from the [Crowdforge][crowdforge] paper, I implemented a `prompt_chain` Wasm/WASI function registered on the Host that takes in a system prompt (e.g. "You are journalist writing about cities."), an input (e.g. an ongoing article), a map step prompt with a `{{text}}` placeholder that is filled in, a reduce step, which folds over (combines) the generated text(s) from the map step, and then the optional LLaMA model stored as a [`gguf`][gguf]. If the optional model path is not provided, the Host will fall back to the default `Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct.Q4_0.gguf` model.
```

So, what does that mean for us? If we provide the same arguments to our Guest Wasm functions, Homestar will return cached responses instantly, which saves us both time and resources, as waiting for large prompt responses when using models, even *smaller* ones like LLaMA 3 trained with 8 billion parameters, can be somewhat latent on devices with limited GPU and memory (like my personal computer).

Is there a way to always provide *new* hallucinations from the Host model? Yes, there is! We can use the `--debug` flag when we start EveryCli to force re-execution of the tasks in our workflow.

```console
./every-cli/cli.js dev ../example-llm-workflows/llm.wasm --debug
```

## Foundations for Privacy

> The learning goals of this project were to experiment with working with LLMs locally on hosts where the training data and tuning of a model remains private and only derived information from prompt-based AI chains can be shared with other users/peers for consumption. AI computation is possible without being tied to a specific vendor or large cloud provider. Essentially, this showcases a positive avenue for decentralized, user-controlled AI-oriented computation that's everything that [IEEE Spectrum's Open-Source AI Is Uniquely Dangerous][ieee] isn't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The learning goals of this project were to experiment with working with LLMs locally on hosts where the training data and tuning of a model remains private and only derived information from prompt-based AI chains can be shared with other users/peers for consumption. AI computation is possible without being tied to a specific vendor or large cloud provider. Essentially, this project showcases a positive avenue for decentralized, user-controlled AI-oriented computation that's everything that [IEEE Spectrum's Open-Source AI Is Uniquely Dangerous][ieee] isn't.
```

Localized, open-source LLM models for home and on-prem use cases are growing in popularity, even leading to the creation of a [LocalLLaMA reddit][reddit-post] community! We've seen how [GDPR][gdpr] has increased the need for companies to be more careful around [PII management and data privacy isolation across regions and region-compliance laws][so-privacy].

> IP is also a concern for companies, as they want to protect proprietary data, including trained models of their own. Some companies have the funding to pay OpenAI or other cloud AI provider platforms to work with their data through private channels, but not every company can afford this; nor does this present security against a massive IP data leak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IP is also a concern for companies, where they want to protect proprietary data, including trained models of their own. Some companies have the funding to pay OpenAI or other cloud AI provider platforms to work with their data through private channels, but not every company can afford this; nor does this present security against a massive IP data leak.
```
